# RFC 001 - simplification of Ngeo buildtools and custom frontends for GeoMapfish

## History

Following POC https://github.com/camptocamp/ngeo/pull/9353 this RFC has been reworked.

## Motivation

- Keep Ngeo-based Geomapfish solutions maintainable;
- Allow creating Ngeo-base Geomapfish solutions with any modern buildtool / framework;
- Allow alternative frontends in Geomapfish (geogirafe, masterportal, uzuverse, ...);

## Current situation / problems

When scaffolding a Geomapfish project, the Ngeo/Gmf build tools and default interfaces are copied.
Ngeo/Gmf is added as a dependency and directly consummed as source code.
There is no alternative frontend, no possibility to mix different versions or use other build tools.
Notably, the code requires specific transformations, managed by webpack 4 plugins:
- AngularJS dependency injection with ngInject;
- SaaS files importation, unicity and ordering;
- SVG files importation and build-time modification;
- AngularJS partials importation.

## Vision

### Allow alternative frontends (GeoGirafe, MasterPortal, Uzuverse, other)

- No change in the way geomapfish is deployed;
- No change in the backend protocol;
- integrate seemlesly with the existing backend and deployment mechanism;
- Allow completly independant frontend (GeoGirafe, MasterPortal, Uzuverse, other);

### Simplify Ngeo/Gmf build tools and make the code standard

- Limit breaking changes for existing users;
- Remove / simplify code;
- Distribute the Ngeo/GMF library as pure ES6 + CSS package;

### Allow to easily extend Ngeo/Gmf

- Ability to use any build system, frontend framework, or package and in any version;
- Expose some states on a case-by-case;
- Document and demo this opt-in mechanism;


## Technical proposition part 1: allow alternative frontends

### Creation of a custom frontend

There will be a `frontend` directory at the root of the Geomapfish project. This directory will contain the custom frontend project.

In this folder the developer should add everything needed to build the frontend like a `package.json`, the custom components, the build tools, the interface html files, etc.

This folder will contain a `Dockerfile`, in charge of building this custom frontend project.
The content is up to the developer, the only constraint is to put the generated files in the `/etc/static-frontend` directory.

Each interface html file must contain the header metadata `dynamicUrl`, pointing to the used `dynamic.json` like: `/dynamic.json` (used by ngeo).
These interfaces will be served by the backend on `/` and `/theme/<name>`.

The other files in the `frontend` directory will be served by the backend on the path `/static-frontend/<file>`.
These paths should be correctly referenced in the html files.

Note: above I consider the entry point as `/` but it should be correcty nanaged by the frontend Docker image if needed.

Note: the i18n should be managed by the frontend project, the backend will only provide language files with localized string related to the backend (like the layer names).

Default custom frontend: the demo will provide a working example, in addition, documentation will be added in the GeoMapFish documentation.

### Integration of the custom frontend

In `c2cgeoportal` we will add a new static route to serve the frontend files from `/etc/static-frontend` directory on the `/static-frontend` path.

In the `c2cgeoportal` configuration we will add a new interface type `custom` (currently we have `ngeo` and `canvas`).

The interface will be defined as:

```yaml
name: desktop  # The name of the interface
type: custom
file: desktop.html  # The html file name
```

If needed a mako boolean can be added to the interface definition if we need to render the html file with mako.

If needed the file can be a glob pattern if there is an hash in the filename.


## Technical proposition part 2: simplify Ngeo/Gmf build tools and make the code standard

Iteratively simplify the existing build tool based on Webpack 4.

### Resolve / stop using ngInject annotation for dependency injection

ngInject allows angularJS code to work when minified.
See https://github.com/Swiip/generator-gulp-angular/issues/1087 for some explanations.
We should write a jscodeshift transform that iterates on the code and:

- create the `$inject` static property;
- remove the @ngInject annotation.

Once done we can remove the `babel-plugin-angularjs-annotate` plugin.

This transform should be stored in the repo so that other users of GeomapFish can run it on their code.

### SaaS files importation, unicity and ordering

We have created the plugin `webpack.scss-loader.js` to load, order and make sure Saas fragments are loaded correctly.
Instead of that we should:
- create scss entrypoints;
- load all scss files, in the right order.

Once done we can remove this plugin.

Where needed, users of GeomapFish will create their own scss file.


### SVG files importation and build-time modification

Some plugin generate SVGs on the fly based on the URL parameters present in the import.
Ex:

- ./font.svg?viewbox&height=1em
- ./url.svg?url

This transformation should be done through a script or manually and the result loaded by the Scss (and html?) files.
This change should be documented so that other users of GeoMapfish can apply it too, if needed.

Once done the plugin `svg-viewbox-loader.js` can be removed.

### AngularJS partials importation

These default html partials are imported using `require()`syntax, which is not standard.

Some tool will be written to:

- take the html content;
- output a js file with "export const template = `the_content_of_the_html`".

Then the requires should be replaced with plain es6 imports.

### Distribute as ES6

Add a "prepare" script to package.json to transpile the code.
Change the package.json to point to properly define its devDependencies, dependencies, peerDependencies.

### Remove unused code / dependencies

Remove unused ol-cesium wrappers. OL-Cesium can be used directly if needed.
We should also consider externalizing code that forces external dependencies. For example:
- jsts
- mapillary
should be opt-in and not be forced on all users.

## Technical proposition part 3: Allow to easily extend Ngeo/Gmf

On a case-by-case basis, we will add hooks / base components to `ngeo`. That could be:

- promises, to share object that never change like the map, the initial permalink.
- stores (RxJS or eventially Signal), to share the AngularJS states as read only.
- functions, to be able to modify the angular state.
- Web components (implemented with Lit).
